Cloud Computing– 2025/26
Project 1
1. Introduction
The goal of this project is to understand how services available in cloud computing
platforms can be used for creating applications that are scalable, fast, and highly available.
The project will consist in the design and implementation of the backend for an application
that manages collections of Legos and the companion testing scripts.
The system will manage information about Lego sets. Users own a set of Lego sets. A User
can create an auction to sell one of her Lego Sets.
For implementing its features, the system must maintain, at least, the following
information (you can add more information, as it seems appropriate for your system):
• User: information about users, including the nickname, name, (hash of the)
password, set of Lego Set owned, and a photo;
• Media: images and videos used in the system;
• LegoSet: information about a Lego set, including a name, a code number, a
description, and at least one photo.
• Comments: Users can add comments for LegoSet.
• Auction: Users can create an auction for selling one of the Lego Set they own. An
auction must refer to a Lego Set and the user that created the auction, and it should
include the base price and the auction close date.
The system must support, at least, the following basic operations using standard REST
rules for defining endpoints:
• User (/rest/user): create, update, delete, retrieve and list users. After a user is
deleted, auctions and comments from the user appear as been performed by a
default “Deleted User” user.
• Media (/rest/media): upload media, download media.
• LegoSet (/rest/legoset): create, update, delete, retrieve and list LegoSets.
• Comment (/rest/legoset/{id}/comment): base URL for comments for a given
LegoSet, supporting operations for creating and listing comments.
• Auction (/rest/auction): create, list auctions. Bids on a given auction should be
performed using a POST in URL (/rest/auction/{id}/bid)
Operations that create an entity with an associated media object (e.g., users and LegoSets)
can be implemented either by having clients executing two consecutive calls, the first for
uploading the image and the second for the corresponding operation; or by executing a
single operation that includes the media and the remaining data.
1.1 Environment
The project will be implemented in Azure, using the resources available to students under
the Azure student program. Check the documentation in lab 1 for more information on how
to claim the credits for your Azure account.
NOTE: Azure services have associated costs. Be careful with the configuration of your
services and the cost when you leave services/resources running, specially, those that are
more expensive, such as Cosmos DB and Redis.
2. Base version
The base version consists of the basic version of the backend service, that includes the base
REST endpoints associated with User, Media, LegoSet, Comment, Auction.
You must decide how the service information is stored in the underlying storage
services/database services, creating the necessary objects/documents.
Besides the base endpoints associated with the previous resources, the service should
provide the following endpoint:
• List of LegoSets of a given user;
• List of most recently added LegoSets;
• Search of Auction for a given LegoSet.
Additionally, optional features presented in section 4.4 will require additional endpoints.
2.1 Services to use
The system should use the following Azure services:
• App service: for creating the REST servers (see lab 1 for more info).
• Blob storage: for storing BLOBs (see lab 1 for more info).
• Cosmos DB database: for storing structure data (see lab 2 for more info).
NOTE: Cosmos DB provides several data models and interfaces. Students are allowed
to use any that they want.
3. Testing
You should develop the necessary scripts for testing your backend service, using artillery.
During the labs, a base version will be provided – you should extend it to test all operations
of your system.
4. Advanced features
NOTE: make sure that it is easy to turn off the advanced features, so that you can
execute tests that compare both – suggestion: have flags that control access to the
additional code needed for the advanced feature.
4.1 Application-level caching [Mandatory]
Caching is fundamental for improving the performance of a system by avoiding slow
database operations and by avoiding repeating the same computations multiple times.
Improve the base version of your backend by using application-level caching whenever it
makes sense. To this end, use the Azure Cache for Redis service.
4.2 Azure Functions [Mandatory]
Use Azure functions to implement some functionality in your application.
Suggestion: Use Azure Functions to perform some periodic computation (e.g., close
auctions, garbage-collection).
Suggestion: Use Azure Functions to compute whether a Lego Sets is liked on not, based
on the contents of the comments (integrate with sentiment analysis) – add an endpoint for
most liked Lego Sets.
Note: Using Azure Functions to solve geo-replication is not considered for this
functionality.
4.3 Extend your system to run in a geo-replicated setting [Optional – 1 points]
Extend your system to have an efficient geo-replicated deployment in, at least, two data
centers.
Note: Cosmos DB allows to specify the data centers in which data should be replicated.
The same does not occur for Blob Storage. A way to address this issue is to replicate the
data in the blob store in multiple data centers using Azure functions.
4.4 Support for advanced search or computations [Optional – up to 2 points]
Extend your application to include some computation-based functionality (only one is
needed).
Suggestion: extends your application to support search on the contents of the comments or
description of Lego Sets. To this end, integrate your system with Azure Cognitive Search.
Suggestion: Compute the trending Lego Sets, based on recently added sets. To this end,
use Apache Spark.
Suggestion: Compute the trending Lego Sets, based on recently added sets. To this end,
use Apache Spark.
Suggestion: For each LegoSet, compute a list of other suggested LegoSets based on the
users that own both LegoSets. To this end, use Apache Spark.
5. REPORT AND EVALUATION
The project report should present the work developed in a clear, concise and complete way
(suggested maximum dimension: 6 pages in a 11pt font, A4 with decent margins). The
report should not include code, but can include pseudo-code to help present some design
features. The following structure is suggested:
1. Introduction : briefly explain the context and goal of the system being developed;
2. Design : introduce the design of the system, including the architecture with its main
components and how these components interact for implementing the different
features of the system;
3. Implementation : briefly introduce any implementation detail that you think it is
worth being highlighted;
4. Evaluation: evaluation results (and discussion) using artillery.
5. Conclusions
The report can be written in Portuguese or English.
5.1 Minimum evaluation [Mandatory]
As a minimum, your report should present an evaluation of your system comparing the
following settings, using artillery:
a) Application deployed in region X, with caching;
b) Application deployed in region X, without caching;
c) Application deployed in some other region Y (make X and Y as far apart as
possible), with or without caching.
5.2 Evaluation in geo-replicated setting [Optional – 1 point]
Evaluate your work by deploying your system in multiple data centers and having clients
calling the different replicas.
Note about evaluation: when evaluating your system, use pricing tiers that provide
predictable quality of service (e.g., use B1 for app services).
6. GRADING
The mandatory part of the project (including code, evaluation and report) will be graded in
up to 16 points (14 points for the code + 2 points for the report). Maximum grading from
optional part as discussed in this document.
7. IMPORTANT DATES
17/October – delivery of checkpoint – at this point, you are expected to have implemented
the basic functionality + application-level caching;
7/November – final delivery of the project.