Cloud Computing – 2025/26
Project 2
Project to be implemented in groups of up to three elements. Students are allowed to form
new groups in this second project.
1. Description
The goal of the project is to experiment how to avoid vendor lock-in when using a cloud
platform. To this end, in this second project, students will modify their solution from the
first project to use technologies that can be deployed in any cloud platform that supports
Docker containers and Kubernetes.
The solution of the second project should support deploying the following
services/functions in Kubernetes – we will be using Azure Kubernetes Service, but the
solution should be able to run in any Kubernetes service:
• (mandatory) Deploying the application server as a set of container replicas;
• (mandatory) Deploying a local caching server – Redis (instead of relying on
Azure Redis Cache);
• (mandatory) Use a persistent volume to store media data (replacing the Blob
Storage);
• (optional) Replace Cosmos DB by a local database – suggestions are MongoDB
or PostgreSQL;
• (optional) Replace timer and http-triggered Azure Functions by HTTP servers
and Kubernetes cronjob functions;
• (mandatory) Test your deployment using artillery.
• (optional) Deploy the test system in Azure Container Instances and collect results
with clients running in different data centers.
Supporting geo-replication is not expected in this second project.
Check lab 9 for details on the steps necessary to achieve these goals.
1.1 Environment
This project should be tested using Azure Kubernetes service.
NOTE: Be careful with the cost when you leave services/resources running, in particular
those that are more expensive, such as VM in Azure Kubernetes service.
Be careful in the selection of the VMs to use for your cluster.
2. REPORT
The project report should include: a) 2 pages describing the project solution; b) 2 pages
with a summary of the results obtained (including some info on how the results compare
to the ones obtained in project 1); and c) the necessary pages for the following annex: (1)
Dockerfiles created; (2) Kubernetes deployment files; (3) anything else relevant for
running the solution (11pt font, A4 with decent margins).
3. GRADING
The mandatory part of the project will be valued in up to 14 point. Maximum grading
from the optional parts is 6 points.
4. IMPORTANT DATES
5/December – delivery of the scripts and report.